---
title: 3. HTTP Server
date: '2023-09-26'
type: book
weight: 3
slug: http-server
---

An HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) server, sometimes known as a web server, is a software application or programme that handles and responds to incoming HTTP requests from clients, generally web browsers. HTTP servers are essential components of the World Wide online that allow online content to be delivered to consumers.

Here are some important features of an HTTP server:


1. **Handling HTTP Requests:** An HTTP server's principal duty is to receive and process incoming HTTP requests from clients such as web browsers.

2. **Processing and Routing Requests:** When an HTTP server receives a request, it processes it, which may include activities such as parsing the request, identifying the requested resource (e.g., a web page or a file), and selecting how to handle the request.

3. **Generating HTTP Responses:** The server generates an HTTP response after processing a request. This answer generally comprises an HTTP status code (showing whether the request was successful or unsuccessful), headers (containing response information), and the actual content to be sent to the client.


4. **Serving Static and Dynamic Content:** HTTP servers may provide static material straight from the file system (for example, HTML files, pictures, CSS files, and JavaScript files). They can also produce dynamic content by running server-side programmes or applications (for example, using PHP, Node.js, or Python) and sending the results as an HTTP response.


5. **Port and Protocol:** HTTP servers usually listen on a specified port (generally port 80 for HTTP or port 443 for HTTPS) and interact using the HTTP or HTTPS protocols. To protect data transmission, HTTPS (HTTP protect) employs encryption.


6. **Concurrency and Scalability:** A powerful HTTP server can handle several incoming requests at the same time, allowing it to serve many customers at the same time. Scalability is accomplished by spreading the load across numerous server instances or by employing load balancers.


7. **Security:** HTTP servers frequently incorporate security measures to guard against common online vulnerabilities like cross-site scripting (XSS), cross-site request forgery (CSRF), and others. They may also offer HTTPS-secured communication.


Apache HTTP Server, Nginx, Microsoft Internet Information Services (IIS), and different server frameworks such as Express.js for Node.js are examples of popular HTTP server software. These servers are crucial to the operation of websites and online applications because they facilitate data flow between clients and servers via the HTTP protocol.


## Create a HTTP server with Bun

This launches an HTTP server on port 3000. All queries are met with a Response with status 200 and the body "Welcome to Bun Course!"

```js
const server = Bun.serve({
  port: 3000,
  fetch(request) {
    return new Response("Welcome to Bun Course!");
  },
});

console.log(`Open localhost: ${server.port}`);
```

[See Here](https://bun.sh/docs/api/http) for details documentation.
